---
layout: post
title: The Danger of Freshman Year
comments: true
---
After completing my freshman year at Penn, I took a bit of time to reflect on what I could have done better or differently. I found a recurring theme that explained my performance, that is to say that I lacked any form of goals for my time at Penn. The steps leading up to my first year of college did not help.
From the time I was about 6 years old to graduating high school, there was a systematic checklist that I went through at each stage of adolescence to guarantee success in the next phase. In elementary school, it was learning basic math, writing and social skills. In middle school, it was being active in sports, extracurriculars, and performing well in school, to setup habits for high school and guarantee placement in the upper level math courses. In high school, everything was taken to the next level. I made perfect grades, took 10 AP courses, played sports all three seasons, and was active in multiple clubs and service organizations. I was subsequently accepted into the Huntsman Program at the University of Pennsylvania and had locked up an internship at a startup for the summer.
And bam, the cycle was completed, the checklist worked, and I was left without an institutionalized roadmap for the next four years of my life.
The college admissions process creates a race to being well-rounded and involved, with at least 6 years of your more formative stage of life being centered largely around one goal, to gain acceptance into the best university possible. The resulting problem is two-fold. The first part being that opportunities are missed to build something great in a phase of life where you have the most free time without real responsibilities. The second part being that it leaves you extremely unprepared for the next four years. I’m not saying that you’re not academically prepared for college, you’ve prepared for that your whole life; however, you are unprepared for achieving a comparable level of success as you did throughout high school and middle school.
In high school, you could be nearly the best at everything without too much effort. If you truly wanted to, you could be valedictorian, president of clubs, and participate in multiple sports. High school doesn’t teach you how to optimize your time or set goals and pick the things your best at. The goals are already set. The bar is quite low.
In college, you cannot be the best at everything. You have to pick your battles, refine the skills that are most important, and define your own metrics. It’s very easy from going from the best to simply mediocre. You can be involved in a club or two, make decent grades, and have your share of fun. But that’s not what you busted your ass and became a Type-A student to achieve. So if you’re coming into your freshman year this fall, I challenge you to define three very detailed and measurable goals for your first year. If I did it over again, it would be a 3.6 GPA, launching one web product, and developing a close relationship with one of my professors.

